2003 October 22

I just graded your second exam and there was some very disturbing
things on the second exam and so I'm going to postpone rotation for
another half hour and talk about question two of the exam.

now i want to put the fear of god in you because the in linear
momentum is the easy part.

we are about to do rotation so objects have three dimensional
configurations and they are rotating in space and

we have round things!

so there are fun things to do but they are complicated.

let me talk about exam 2.

there's also something I didn't finish last time which is the rocket
which is one of the coolest things that I get to talk about but I
think that exam two trumps the rocket, so even though I want to finish
the rocket lets talk about exam two.

what do I want to say about exam two?

who here watched the baseball game last night?

It was all bad for me.  Yankees won.  and I don't really have any
strong feelings about either the Yankees or the marlins but I did make
the mistake of placing a pretty large bet on the marlins.

so I'm rooting for the marlins.  suddenly my interest in baseball has
greatly expanded.

as you will recall, on exam two was the following

a baseball pitcher has a ball here here's the before picture.

now, after: how does a baseball pitcher throw?  you didn't really know
how a baseball pitcher throws, because i didn't require a very
accurate...

anyone know what this is?

its a hockey ball.  its a street hockey ball.  or whatever, or some
game people play at schnmancy hoity toity universities.  I know that
because i found this on the campus of Princeton university.

how does a pitcher throw?  watch the ball!

[throws]

okay, everyone see that?  lets try that again.  watch the ball!

[throws and it gets stuck in the wall -- laughter]

i did work on the ball.  how much work did I do on the ball?  but I
asked an easier question first, which was what was the impulse?

here is before, and here is after.  lets see, what do I look like
afterwards?  like that?

[draws]

I gave you that v is 100, but we don't have to deal with that just yet

I asked for the impulse. and I even told you that it was delta p, so
there was absolutely no excuse to get this wrong.  what is the impulse
in this case.  describe it in words.  who knows what the impulse is?
one person knows.  that would explain why so many did badly on exam 2.

Change in momentum!  change in momentum; that's why I called it delta
p, and I didn't put a vector hat on it because i didn't specify a
direction.  so i was really talking about the magnitude of delta p.
the change in momentum, that is p before minus p after.  like that.

oops.  p after minus p before.  but I was taking the absolute value in
the end so it doesn't matter.

[fixes]

what is the momentum before?

zero!  because its just sitting here and what's after?

mass times velocity!  mv so delta p is mv and I said that v is roughly
40 m/s (because I said 100 mi/hr and there's 1600 m/mi and 3600 s/hr
the ratio of 3600/1600 is a little bit bigger than two, so you divide
by something a little bit bigger than two, so you get something like
40 m/s for 100 mi/hr).

the mass is the mass of the baseball which we will come to in a
second.

[question from audience]

you can remember it as being all 4s; which is okay.  but I always
remember things just by recomputing them.  I don't ever remember
specific numbers; I just end up doing that calculation over and over
again. its the kind of calculation you should be able to do fast.

[question]

absolutely right -- so we're going to come back to that, we haven't
even talked about the configuration of the baseball player yet; we are
about to get there.  remember that if the baseball player was, like a
-- has anyone ever gone to a batting cage?

in a batting cage you don't have a pitcher, unless you are a very
w2wealthy person, when you go to a batting cage, what is there?  a
machine going cachung cachung.  a pitcher doesn't erally work like
that.  but even if you assumed the pitcher threw a ball like that, I
graded you fine!

how does a pitcher throw a ball?  a pitcher winds up and throws like
that.  they can't move arbitrarily far, because they have to keep
their foot on one spot.  but they do wind up, absolutely.

we'll come back to that; that's very important.

we need the mass of the baseball.  and I had a baseball in the room.
and it did not weigh a kilogram.  on the other hand, if you put down a
kilogram, I graded you just fine.

if you put down five kilograms, I did not grade you just fine.  you
lost a point for putting down five kilograms.

remember I said explicitly in class at the beginning of the class: I
am going to expect physics is not about a set of formulas.

you can know all the formuulats you like.  but if you cannot compute
the force that a baseball player applies to a baseball, you do not
know physics.  that means part of physics is knowing how much is a
kilogram is!

right?

if you do not know what a kilogram is, go figure out what a kilogram
is.

yes?

[can you give me an example of something that weighs a kilogram?]

a liter of water.  how many of you have ever drunk a pint of beer?

report immediately to the deans.

how much does a pint of beer weigh?

a pound!  a pint's a pound!

[really!?]

a kilogram's a liter.

a liter's a kilogram.  a pint is a pound.

you know that's a kilogram, because a liter is 10 x 10x10 cm of water.
that's 1000 cubic cm and a cubic cm is a gram.  compare a baseb all
to this much water.  and you know when you buy a liter bottle of water
or soda, its heavier than a baseball.

[what's the mass of a baseball?]

I have no idea.  if I was doing this problem., and I am doing this
problem, I would say that a baseball is between a quarter pound and a
half pound.  So it is something like a quarter of a kilogram.  0.1,
0.2, 0.3 kg.

Say again?

0.5 pounds --- half a pound, which is quarter a kilogram.  so i figure
  its about a quarter of a kilo but I don't know exactly and I don't
  care exactly, because this is an estimation problem, so even if you
  said a kilogram, I said okay -- but I didn't say okay, I said
  "okay".

so the mass is on the order of 0.2 Kg thats not a bad number and a lot
of people had this number or something close to this.

so what do we get for delta p?

0.2 times 40 gives 8 kg m/s and that was delta p.  some got 11; thats
  fine.  okay.

work how much work does the pitcher do?

the problem asked for these things in this order to clue you in to the
right procedure. but you can use any procedure you like.  In fact many
of you did a very convoluted thing but nonetheless got the right
answer in the end and thats fine but grading this problem is a night
mare because most of you wrote like ten pages about your personal
experincees and the last boyfriend your had, and all this stuff.  of
course you crushed it all into those two pages, so grading it is
amusing.  and i am not quite done but I couldn't hold off on
discussing this.

what is the best way to compute the work.  think about this for a
second.  you all have a formula for work in your head.  that formula
is force times distance can any of you think of a reason *not* to use
that formula right now?

right!  because the final thing i am asking for in this problem is the
force

clearly the fact that work is force times distance is relevant to this
problem. but right now we don't know the force so the force times
distance isn't very useful.  so who here things they know a better way
to compute the work?

the problem said the work done by the pitcher on the ball.

at this after point here, the ball is thrown and it is moving, what is
the pitcher doing?

following through!  not haningn out.  the pitcher doesn't throw it and
is immediately like...

no the pitcher comes off the mound, following through.  so actually
the pitcher does work not just on the ball but also the pitcher
himself after the throw is moving.  so there is kinetic energy
imparted to the pitcher as well as the ball.  some of you included
that, but of course the problem said haw much work does the pitcher do
on the ball.

I asked a question: does anybody here have a way of computing the work
without doing force times distance?

one...six...nine people.  what's your suggestion?

momentum over time.  one thing that a bunch of people did is realize
that momentum and energy are somehow related. and p/t would make a
force, and then I can plug that into force times distance.  so a
change of momentum over time is a force, multiply by a distance is an
energy.  if I want to do that I have to estimate what about the throw?

a time?

what time do I have to estimate?  the time at which he threw?  no?
what time?

the time from here to here.  does anyone want to comment on that?

its not very long -- that's true.

how long is it?

some of you just threw a time out there and said I'm just going to
assume its half a second.  can it possibly be half a second?

can any of you think of an argument, ,very straightforward argument,
that it can't be half a second?

yes?

remember that this class is about learning!  in fact i would like
people who got it wrong in the exam jumping in here because they are
going to do it right next time.

[long suggestion]

when i throw the ball, I throw it about t this far.  that is about the
distance I am throwing.  that's about that distance.  when I drop it
that far, its about a second, maybe a bit more

[drops, then throws]

is that about a second that it is in my hands?  it wasn't even a
second to the wall, let alone a second to the wall?

can anyone come up with the argument that it can't be half a second?
you have everything you need on the board.

good!  nice!  actually that's a good argument.  if you don't know
about baseball, that argument doesn't help you.  if you know about
baseball, if the throwing of the pitch took a second, there would be
stealing bases all over the place, because in a second, someone like
Derek Jeter can go a long way.  I am hoping he breaks his ankle.

I know some people in new York that can have that done for me.

what's a really simple argument that it can't be a second or half a
second?

[correct suggestion...]

boom!  what an argument!  say the throw took a second.  it is
basically going from 0 to 40 m/s.  while its in my arm, its average
speed is about 20 m/s, so if it is in my arm for a second, how long is
my arm?

3 m is not a bad guess, because it is longer than my arm.  how long is
my arm, by the way?

yeah, fingertip to fingertip is roughly your height, that's not a bad
thing to know.  This distance for me is about six feet, a little
bigger than my height.

so, this distance here is about 2 m, and you will see that as I throw
it I go at least that distance, maybe 2 2.5 m.  and a baseball pitcher
goes futhere

the thing about pitching fastballs is that you really extend that, so a
professional baseball pitcher probably goes about three meters.

so how long is the time?

its about 0.1 seconds, is more like it!  not 0.5 sec.  but even people
who just wrote down 0.1 seconds -- how did you estimate 0.1 seconds?
Like how long is this on the ground when it bounces?

[drops ball]

is it on the ground for 0.1, 0.01, 0.001, 0.0001, 0.00001, 0.000001
seconds?

So I will accept a writing down of 0.1 s from anyone who can tell me
how long that was on the ground.  I need an argument that it is 0.1
seconds.  because if you can't estimate the time that the dropped ball
is on the ground when it bounces, how can you estimate how long it is
in the pitcher's hand when he throws?

no one can judge short time intervals accurately from just looking at
something.  I cant.

my heartbeat -- actually, I might be able to if my heartbeat much
faster than it does.  the accuracy with which you can estimate times
is related to your heartbeat, I suspect.

change in momentum over time would work if you went through all that
argument about how long it is in my hand.  so there is an even easier
way to estimate the work.  what is it?

change in kinetic energy!  where did the work go?

it went into moving th ball!  work is a transfer of energy.

the work the player did on the ball is a transfer of energy from what
form to what form?

where is that energy stored?  In his arm! it is not exactly potential
energy, it is something much more complicated that I don't really
understand.  Actually I think for short motions, it is some kind of
fluid hydrostatic energy, for short motions.  Then over time, through
the game it is chemical energy.  some kind of combination of
hydrostatic and chemical energy in the pitcher.  then the work
transfers it to the ball.


so the best way to estimate the work is to just see how much kinetic
energy was transferred to the ball.

what is the initial kinetic energy of the ball?  zero!

what is the final? 1/2 m v^2 plugging in... we get 160...

Joules!  or...

kg m^2/s^2!  or...

Newton meters.  good.

Now you didn't have to do it in si units, and some of you had amazing
expressions.  like lb meter mi per second hour.  The best one was lb
meter mi per s hr.  and one of the exams that had it in those units
actually had the right number.  and got full points.

[but si units!]

if its correct!  the units were correct.

very important -- people who gave me answers with incorrect answers
were crushed.  incorrect units was punished harshly on this exam.

some of the exams in problem 1 have (m-1) somewhere in the expression.
you lost points for doing that.  over and above the points you would
have lost for just getting the problem wrong.  because that expression
is so obviously wrong.

why is that expression wrong?

they have different dimensions!  you can't possibly compare them.

Units are incredibly important.

Being able to estimate things in the correct units is very important.

But in terms of an answer, as long as its the write answer in the
right units, you are fine.  so the way that person go the right
answer.  they got the answer is they had the momentum as 50 lb mi/r --
half a pound at 100 mi/hr and then multiplied that by the distance
over the time, which they got as 3 m/ 0.1 s so they divided by time to
get force and multiplied by distance to get energy.  The time in sec
and the distance in meters.  so they got lb mi m / s hr.  if you do
the right conversions you can get out of that, but it is a little bit
hard to get out of that.

here's the question.  how do we compute the force?

we have delta p.  we have delta k.  and the last thing it asked you
for is the force.  the average force.  I can think of two ways of
computing the average force.  can anyone suggest one?

good!  one would be the change in momentum over the change in time.
that would be one way.  another?

change in work over distance!

I will accept either of these as long as delta t and delta l are well
estimated.  we just talked about estimating delta t -- how did we
estimate it?  we estimated it by estimating delta l and looking at how
fast the ball is going.  so we can skip a step, and just estimate
delta l and use this formula.

right?

what's a good estimate for delta l?  well if I was throwing a ball, it
would be about 2 m; of course I can't throw at 100 mi/hr?  Anyone here
can?

have you been clocked?  you have never been clocked at like Disneyland
and got clocked?

I can throw a 60 or something; I can't throw very fast -- so that
throw I threw earlier threw out my back and it was only a 40 or 50.
so baseball pitchers throw very fast.  and they do it in a very
interesting way.  the real biomechanics of pitching is amazing.  if
you see a pitcher throw in slow motion, you see that they are yanking
this part of their arm around, and this part whips around.  they throw
their elbows and then this part flips around and then its all about
telling your hand to release the ball at the right time so it goes in
the right direction.  I can't imagine how people do it accurately.

By the way, the force we are going to compute is the force is the
force on the ball.  is that the largest force in this problem?  no --
you can tell by the tone of voice I am using -- the pitcher is not
just accelerating the ball, the pitcher is accelerating this part of
his arm, which is much more massive than the ball.  so the forces on
his elbow are probably much greater.

We have estimated that this distance is about 2 m, so the force is 160
J over 2m, which is 80 N because 1 J = 1 Nm.

does that number seem reasonable?

that was the last thing the problem asked, which most people forgot to
answer.  but i was so nice to you guys, i didn't even take off points
if you didn't answer the question of reasonableness.  But I did
sometimes take off points if the answer was incredibly unreasonable.

One of the answers I got was 44,000 N.  Can someone give me an
argument that that is not reasonable?

by the way, getting to that point, and then saying "that's not
reasonable for the following reason" -- GOT you a point.  right?

how many people did that?  Not many.

Yes?  why is 44,000 not reasonable?

Exactly!  a pitcher who can do this could lift a Volkswagen Jetta.
Pretty easily.  In fact they could pitch a Volkswagen bug!

the old bug, not the new one.

okay good.  that's a good argument that that is not reasonable.  and
that would have gotten someone with 44,000 N a point.

Okay I love filling you guys with fear.  You look like you are at a
funeral.  but like one of those old-time funerals, where you worry
about the mortalities of your souls, which is good because physics is
not a set of equations.

the equations were not the hard part of this problem.  it was figuring
out what it is you do know and what it is you don't know, and making
sure that the simple things are things you know.  like nobody can
complain to me that this wad mathematically sophisticated.

now was this number a reasonable number?  we haven't answered that.
we have only argued that 44000 isn't reasonable.  is this a reasonable
number?

the fact that 44000 is not reasonable is relevant.  so lets try
another possibility.  what about if I had said it was 0.001 N.  Is
that reasonable?

No.  why not?  somebody give me a reason.

[Force = mass * a that means the ball is accelerating really slow, and
it will take forever to get to 100 mi hr]

Okay, that's not a bad argument, but an even simpler one goes like
this.  how much force am I applying to the ball right now

[holds ball]

mg!  what's mg well its about 0.2 kg times 10 m/s^2 which would be 2
N.

so if I got a number that was much less than 2 N then the baseball
player would not even be applying this much force to the ball.  so I
take that to be an argument about reasonableness.  If it was many
orders of mag higher the pitcher could pitch cars.  If it was many
order of mag smaller than the pitcher wouldn't even be able to lift
the ball.

[long question]

its 400 m/s^2.  do you not believe it?  What have I done wrong?

[if you accelerate at that rate for 0.1 s then you are going 40 m/s]

good!  another way of thinking about whether it is reasonable!

some people made the horrifying mistake of estimating both delta t and
delta l and having those two estimates be totally inconsistent.  so if
you think that delta t is 1 sec and delta l is 3 m, it can't possibly
be consistent.  How are delta t and delta l related?  there is only
one dimensionally correct relationship, what is it?

delta l / delta t is v!  Now you have to modify that a bit because it
is accelerating during the throw, so you probably want to put in a
half there, but basically the ratio of this to this better by 40 m/s so
if you assume both, they better both have that relationship to within
a factor of a few; so if you got that relationship to within a factor
of a few I let it go.

Are there any questions about that?

who here thinks that problem was hard?

a few of you.

somebody who thinks its hard, why did you think its hard?

[I used the distance from the pitcher to the plate as delta l]

good.  so a bunch of people made that mistake.  Can you tell me why
that mistake is completely wrong?

[because when it is flying to the plate, the pitcher is not pushing on
it]

Right -- its just in free fall once he has released it; although
actually there is air resistance and air resistance is substantial.

I want you to look inside and tell me why it was hard.

You didn't think about the problem globally?  you were

DS330052.dss 37 mins in or so
