2003-09-03

good morning class

[good morning]

one of the themes so there is a lot of themes in this class and their
is a lot of things we try to get across, but one of the most important
things is that physics, the real study of physics is totally different
from anything that you learn in high school.  who here had really good
physics in high school? who had a really bad physics teacher in high
school?  You answered both!

Whether your physics teacher in high school was really good or really
bad, one of the things you are going to discover very quickly in this
class is that university physics is very very different from what you
learn in high school.  In high school a lot of what you did was learn
about equations and how to use equations and how to derive equations.
you learned about problems certain kind of problems you can solve and
you learned techniques you can use to solve them.  in this class we
are going to learn about principles.  we are going to use problems and
we are going to sue equations and we are going to use math and we are
going to use all sorts of techniques for understanding the universe.
I don't care whether or not you can solve some particular problem, you
can always type into a web search the problem you are trying to solve
and you can find a solution.  The goal of this class is not to learn
how to solve problems, the goal of this class is to learn about
fundamental things in the Universe.  And those fundamental things, the
fundamental properties of the universe appear in all sorts of things
around you.  Here's an example.

I was walking down the street this morning and above me on the third
story there was one of those contraptions from which they wash
windows.  Here's the guy washing windows up above me.  And the guy
washing windows up above me -- this is three stories -- I am looking
checking it out, because you know there is physics up there, there is
all sorts of physics up there, there are all sorts of pulleys up
there, and tensions in the ropes, and I am imagining all of the forces
in this platform, and its sagging and so on.  so I am checking it out
thinkuoung about that and all of a sudden he accidentally knocks his
bucket and the bucket starts to fall.

here is the bucket starting to fall.  I see the bucket falling towards
me, and I think to myself am i dead, or do I have time to jump out of
the way, or should I write a little sign saying please move out of the
way, there is a falling bucket, install that sign, and then get out of
the way.  so which should you do?  should you just think I'm dead and
wait for the moment of destruction, or should you jump out of the way,
or should you paint a little sign saying caution, falling bucket, and
install that sign and then jump out of the way so that no one else
gets hurt?

[how fast is it moving]

I've told you everything you need to know.  The bucket is three
stories up; it has just fallen off.

[how many meters is a story?]

How many meters is a story?  You know how many meters is a story as
much as I do.

[three meters?]

Maybe.  what do you think it is?  how tall do you think this room is
here?  is this room one story, two stories, three stories?

[confusion]

Here's some practical suggestions from the bottom: just jump out of
the way, and think about it later.  that's a good suggestion, and if
you are in this scenario, I suggest that's what you do.

Now, one of the things you could have said, is, obviously, you are not
dead as soon as you see it, because here I am, I survived.  so I am
something that survived, so you can rule out that possibility already.
What I am trying to get at is that every day, when you are walking
down the street, physics things happen, and you have quite abit of
intuition about how physics works, and you need to use it to solve the
problem.

So let's just imagine the scenario now.  I want you to imagine the
scenario, I want you to imagine three stories.  How many stories is
this room?  It is at least two.  In fact, if I open this door, you
will find that I am on the basement level, you entered this room on
the first floor, and the ceiling in this room goes up, so in fact this
room is nearly three stories tall.  And you can tell that because you
have a pretty good idea of what a story is like.  For example, you
can;t quite touch the ceiling ina typical building in new York, if you
jump you can usually just get it

[jump]

so even that TV is on the second story.  and so we're like two and a
half stories.  so I want you to think about things like that.  you
might think well my ability to estimate the height of this room has
nothing to do with anything, but actually it has a lot to do with
physics, because one of the things we want to do in this class is use
everyday experiences to solve physics problems.

It is important to remember that physics is not a subject that exists
on pieces of paper with little integral signs.  physics is not a
formal system, it is not mathematics, it is something that describes
the actual behavior of actual things.

Okay, so now visualize this, and think about how long it takes the
bucket to fall.  and I am going to give you some options, and we are
going to vote.

One option is that it takes 100 seconds for the bucket to fall.  how
long is 100 seconds?

[a long time!]

It is almost two minutes.

so that seems a bit too long.

maybe it takes 10 seconds?  maybe it takes 1 second?  maybe it takes
0.1 seconds?  these are we are going to do a lot of problems in class
where we just try to get rough estimates.  today is one of those days
in which we try to use just basic physics principles, basic ideas you
already know, and your own experiences to get answers to physics
problems.

okay, you must vote.  think about it.  don't do a calculation.  well,
you can do a calculation, but you don't need to do a calculation,
because you probably have a pretty good idea.  think about a bucket
falling from way up there?  wham!  does it fall like that?  No, it
doesn't fall like that.  how does it fall?

[vote: 100s 0, 10s 11, 1s N-11, 0.1s 0]

how big is N, anyway? it is about well there are about 5 of you there,
1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9, so we have about 40 people here, so this is
something like 30.

One thing I want to be clear about is that it is almost never
necessary in this class to give me an exact answer for anything.  so
one of the things that people think about physicists is that I should
have come in here in a lab coat.  You think of physicists as being in
lab coats and they have all this big equipment and they have all this
big equipment and they are turning dials and they are recording all of
these really long numbers and there are computers crunching the
numbers and they say: yes, the magnetic moment of the electron is
[long number].

But of course that is a very specialized part of physics where we have
in the rare moments of physics in which we have an exact model which
we can exactly understand a physical experiment and we have an exact
experiment we can talk about many digits of accuracy.  In most of the
physics we are talking about it is things like this chair, and when I
slide it alnogn the floor, how far will it go?  we will never predict
the outcome of an experiment like that with high accuracy, we will
always have to make approximations.

Even in this problem, we are going to have to make approximations, and
we are not going to get a precise problem.  In fact I never want
precise answers.  Just forget about precision; that is not what we are
doing in this class; we are learning about principles.

This guess was based on your intuition.  How would you go about
solving this problem?

[]

Okay, good, one thing that came up is that gravity 9.8 m/s^2 good,
lets hold that thought for a second.

Is gravity the only thing we have to worry about in this problem?  No.
What else do we have to worry about?

[]

the wind!  Okay so there's wind, and in fact if it had been windier
out there today, I might have been able to like -- no problem -- and
just waited for it to go whoom and get blown out of the way.

so wind is something, and I am going to add to wind just generally the
air.

now when you solve how many of you have solved a problem like this
back in high school.  Almost all of you.  Now when you solved that
problem what did you do about the wind or the air?

[ignored it]

You neglected it!

Okay so here we are going to start to see -- we are going to get a
little bit of a peek into the differences between physics now from
physics back then [meaning high school].

The difference is not going to be that we solve this problem correctly
now, including air resistance.  That is not the difference.

What's the difference?  the difference is that in high school you
solved this problem over and over again and problems like it -- things
sliding down ramps and blocks on ropes over pulleys -- and you always
said oh ignore air resistance.  So who's going to tell me when that
approximation is valid?

[]

Nobody?  Did you say never?  So its not never allowable to ignore air
resistance, however, if you don't understand when you can ignore air
resistance and when you can't ignore air resistance, then you never
solved this problem!  You have solved some math problem where you
plugged 1/2 a t squared and some v naught and something like that into
an equation.  But that problem had nothing to do with physics, because
it is not even physics if you haven't answered the question "can I
ignore air resistance"

One of the points of this class is to understand the approximations we
are making.  It is a huge huge thing here: we are always
approximating.  In fact all of the laws of physics are approximations.
Quantum mechanics, general relativity, the standard model of particle
physics, qed, qcd, everything electromagnetism, every law of physics
is an approximation.  how is it an approximation?  well it turns out
that all of these laws work in certain regimes but we can't
stitchethem together into a theory of everything.  and that means
that every law of physics you have ever learned or will ever learn
here in the next four years -- unless there is a major breakthrough
in the next four years -- is going to be an app;roximation.

So when I when we drop this bucket.  Even if we consider all the air
resistance and all the complexities of this bucket of water, we still
would only have an approximate answer for how long it is going to take
to fall.  It is very important to understand that everything is an
approximation and remember that we will have to justify our
approximations.  Lets remember that and come back to that.

What else could matter to this problem?

[]

Contents of the bucket.  Good.  Now, why could the contents of the
bucket matter?  Can anyone think of an extreme example in which the
contents of the bucket would matter?

[]

Filled with lead?  If the bucket was filled with lead versus filled
with water, what would be the difference in how it gets down here?

[]

It would be faster.  Its true that the lead-filled bucket will fall
faster.  Why will it fall faster?

[]

The mass is greater; that is not quite the reason that it would be
faster.  What is the reason it would be faster?  What if I made a
really really really hugely massive hot air balloon here?  Its really
massive.  What would happen?  It would go up!  So its not really the
mass that matters, since I can come up with a more massive object that
would not fall faster.  What is it?

[]

[okay lets come back to that -- because that is part of the struggle.
yes]

[]

Its sort of density that matters, and even that is not quite right,
but it is closer, because if I had a really dense object, its not so
much affected by...

[]

Air resistance!  Okay, so some good ideas are coming out here, and we
are going to have to put it all together.  The whole point of this
class is that we have are going to get really really confused before
we put it all back together.

[]

Buoyancy!  What does air do?  Air resists the motion, meaning that if
you are running very fast, there is air like blowing back at you, but
it is also the case that if you get on a scale, does the scale
measure your mass,? it measures your weight.

I get measured in a vacuum [draws person being weighed in a bell jar],
but if you get weighed in air, it turns out that you are displacing
some air, and therefore there is some buoyancy.  So I have already
said hot air balloon.  Imagine that his bucket is a novelty bucket, it
looks like a bucket, but is helium baboon that he knocked off, it
mould go up, right? not because it has negative mass, not because
there is an upward wind, but because there is buoyancy.

So there is air resistance, and there is also buoyancy, which I can
never spell.  I didn't get this job for spelling.

Contents of the bucket.  So we are going to come back to how the
contents of the bucket matter.  Does any one want to throw anything
else into the mix of what matters to this problem?

Surface area?  So the shape of the bucket generally.  I'm going to
generalize it, surface area, volume, shape of the bucket.

The contents of the bucket includes the mass, but it also includes
things like the dynamics of the stuff inside.  So say, for instance,
that this wasn't a bucket, but it was a helium tank, compressed helium
tank, and when he knocked it off, he accidentally punctured it.

okay so then the bucket has a little hole in it out of which
decompressing helium is spewing.  Then this bucket becomes what?

[]

A little rocket -- whooooooosh wham!  I had like two seconds to say
wow!

Okay, so its also kind-of the dynamics of the stuff inside the bucket.
There is a dynamics issue.

when you solved this problem in high school, which of these
properties did you use when you were estimating the fall of the bucket.

[]

Gravity, mass, you used the mass.

[]

height of the thing -- how high up it is.

But you didn't use the area or volume.  You didn't consider these
other things, but there is no reason they shouldn't matter, and in
fact if you are doing an accurate calculation they do matter.

I have told you that I am not doing an accurate calculation.  so I ask
you in all seriously, how much do you thin air resistance does
matter?  Its falling and in one second you have time to have a few
thoughts.  One thought you could have is "well, I think its going to
take a second", you should think it more quickly than this " but maybe
air resistance is great enough that it is going to flutter down here
and I have lots of time".

so is it?  what do you think?

[]

it does, absolutely, so I am asking you to use some common sense, if
you see a guy on a window washing platform kick a zinc bucket off,
what do youothink it is going to contain?

[]

water, along with a polymer emulsion in it, known as soap.  and that
of course changes things like surface tension.  this bucket has got
this surface -- one thing that is very interesting -- in the Courant
institute is one of the premier applied mathematics institute in the
world and its here at NYU.  At the C I, people try to simulate with
huge computers and mathematical and phsycal apprixmaitions, complex
physical phenomena.  For example, Charlie Peskin over there has a
model of the human heart.  An incredibly accurate simulation of the
human heart with which you can study blood flow and pathologies in a
completely theoretical way.  It is an incredible simulation they do.
Bucket of water?  they can't do.  A bucket of water is an astoundingly
difficult thing to simulate. Anyone know why?

[]

The mere fact that it is water matters, because it has turbulent
eddies and so forth in it, but with enough computer time, they can do
the water itself.  Yeah?

That's getting at it.  There's all sorts of stuff going on in the
surface of the water have you ever looked at the surface of water in a
glass?  You probably had to in high school.  It has a meniscus.  But
its that free surface, a surface that is completely free, and the
surface has tension, but it can also break and drops can come off the
surface.  That changes the topology of the surface.  So there's all
sorts of interactions between the dynamics of the water and the
dynamics of the surface and the topology of the surface and in fact
no one can model that accurately right now.

So in fact if you wanted to do an incredibly accurate calculation of
this problem you actually couldn't with current technology!  So maybe
when supercomputers get a hundred times faster than they are now,
maybe they can just simulate the whole system, but they can't do it
now.

So, this is actually a problem that no living physicist can actually
answer precisely.  Therefore were not going to try and answer it
precisely.  we are going to ry to figure out what matters most.

And try to get an approximate answer.

okay so, who here thinks that air resistance is going to dramatically
affect the behavior of this bucket?  You can look up now and say oh
the air is here, so i have tons of time!  like the guy had dropped the
front page of the new York times.

if air resistance isn't going to be a big deal, someone give me an
argument that it isn't going to be a big deal.

we all pretty much know it isn't going to be big deal.  in fact even
for this bit of chalk, air resistance isn't a big deal.  the chalk
doesn't float down in the air, it basically accelerates down by
gravity.  unlike this piece of paper.  there's something for which
air resistance matter s a lot. [drops chalk] here's something for
which air resistance doesn't matter much at all.

what is the difference between these things?

[chalk is smaller]

chalk is smaller.  these two pieces of paper have almost exactly the
same mass.  actually this has a staple, let me take off the same
amount of paper off of each.  now these have basically the same mass.
one has a bit more ink; you can compute how much that matters.

now these have basically the same mass.  i crumple one up.  there's no
contest.  So does that refine what you were saying?  okay so area as
area goes down, air resistance gets less important.  that's a very
good thing.

lets do another experiment.  [borrows ??]  this notebook and this
piece of paper have very similar areas.  which will fall faster?

why?  because it is heavier.  it is more massive.  good.  so, as mass
goes up, air resistance gets less important.  So what do you think the
relevant thing is?

the mass of the bucket is pretty massive and...

...good here we go, we are nearly there; this is good.  very big deal.
huge, this is as big as the wod approximation.  comparisons when i
compare something when i say the mass of the bucket is really big and
the area of the bucket is really small you should ask, its like on TV,
now with new great taste. tastes better?  tastes better than what?  my
gramma's wig?  that's not what it tastes better than.  you need to
compare it with something that's similar.  okay getting scared?  nope?
not scared at all?

so what are we comparing the mass of the bucket to?

oooh, that's good, something that would be affected by air resistance,
like what?  the piece of paper, so one thing you can say is that the
mass of the bucket is greater than a piece of paper of the same area.
that's true, but its not sufficient, because a stack of three sheets
of paper is also more massive than a sheet of paper.

what's the really relevant thing.  we are asking if the bucket is
affected by what?

its air resistance, so surface area comes in, mass comes in, but
what's the surface area and mass of the air?

we are asking whether or not air is important. and we are asking if
the mass of the bucket is large.  So we are comparing the mass of the
bucket to the mass of what?  All of the air on the surface of the
Earth?

That weighs a lot!

right, so ..

ooh, surface area of the air the bucket traveled through.  so here we
have a bucket, and the bucket is going to fall.  it sill fall l.ike
this towards us, and it might turn, or whatever, but basically it is
going to carve a path like this.  it carves a path like this.  now we
can compare the mass of the bucket to what?

we can compare the bucket's mass to the mass of this column of air and
that would start to get at the question of whether air resistance
matters.  now how much does this column of air weigh?

[not much]

not that much?

okay we will come back to that in a minute.

lets assume for now -- this is a good thing to keep in mind, remember
that we are playing around.  we are not going to get a precise answer.
yoppu are waiting for some square roots and 2s and hs and some kind
of equation.  your lucky if we get some kind of thing written on the
board but we re not really ogin to solve this problem today.  too
hard.

lets make the approximation.  we can solve under an approximation.
lets try the approximation you learned in high school and then we are
going to come back and ask what the approximation is about.

so what is the approximation you learned in high school?

no, don't give me an equation.  I want a phyiscial description of it.

the approximation was constant acceleration.

Now this approximation means you are assuming you are effectively
assuming a very important thing about the air, which we just
discussed, which is that you are assuming that you can ignore air
resistance.

what else are you assuming?  it is a wierder thing that you are
assuming.

the mass stays constant.  okay that's a really weird thing, and you
are assuming that, so its not jetting stuff out.

where does that constant acceleration come from?  who said this?

before newton?

Galileo said this -- in fact Galileo is famous for an experiment that
he never did.  what is it?

he dropped two balls off of the leaning tower of Pisa with
different...

...masses and they fell and what happened??

they hit the ground at the same time.  that's an experiment he never
did, and we know that for a lot of reasons, not the least of which is
that in fact, if you do that experiment, and you watch carefully, you
will see that they hit at different times.  because even with
cannon balls, there is enough air resistance to make them hit at
slightly different times.  They go thump-thump.

Like that and people at the time wouldn't have been all that convinced
by it anyway, because what's the really big difference between a ten
pound cannonball and a twenty pound cannonball? who cares?  And they
hit at different times anyway.

Of course Galileo was really really sneaky, so Galileo probably would
have done the experiment the night before, checked, found that the
ten pound ball fell a little bit slower, and would have then released
the ten pound ball a little earlier to compensate.  Because Galileo
had no principles.

Galileo knew that what he was doing is correct because he did some
brilliant experiments that showed it correctly.  We will come to them
later.  They are incredible experiments.  Because he was working he
was figuring out the kinematics of falling objects and he didn't even
have a clock.  Galileo didn't even have a clock and in fact he designed
experiments that would make noises in a rhythm because in fact your
sense of rhythm is more accurate than any clock he had.

He would roll things down ramps, and the ramps were grooved so that
the rolling objects would go click click click in a rhythm because he
could feel a rhythm better than he could make a clock.  So he was a
very good example of someone who used the things around him and his
experiences to figure out things about the physiucsal world he was not
afraid to use his own experience.

okay so we were assuming ignoring air resistance and then the
constant acceleration with which everything accelerates at 9.8 m/s^2
or whatever assumes something else.  it assumes that the composition
internal composition properties of the bucket don't matter.

so we are kind-of treating the bucket as a point particle.  and I just
emphasized to you that the bucket is not a point particle.  it is
in fact something so complex that no physicist and no engineer can even
simulate it on a supercomputer.  so approximating it as a point
particle is kind0-of insane, but we are cing to come pack to that and
it is going to turn out that for almost anything there is a way of
making this approximation correct

so for ex if I throw this chair across the room, it will do something
complicated, it will spin around -- you have probably seen something
like this on WWF, with folding chairs or something like that?  but if
i throw this chair it is going to go all over the place it will be
spinning and vibrating and stuff like that, but one point in the chair
will actually describe a very close to a perfect parabola.  what
point is that?

[]

its the center of gravity or center of mass.  there is a location in
this chair.  lets see if we can locate it.

[hangs chair from various points to "triangulate" the center of mass]

its about there.  yeah that point there will describe something very
close to the sort of ideal trajectory.  so actually we are relying on
a lot of physics.  this is relying on a lot of physics we haven't done
yet.  one of the weird things about this course is that we kind of go
backwards.  we start by making approximations we don't know how to
justify, and later in the class when we study real objects, were going
to get to why this approximation works, how the center of mass works
and why the center of mass can why you can treat the object as if it
is all at the center of mass.  and you can't for everything, but you
can for some things.  You can't when you describe the spin of this or
when you describe the temperature of this or when you describe the
surface of the water, you can't treat it as a point.

but for this thing, lets just try this approximation.

now in this approximation, what things can possibly matter?  if I
treat this approximation, what things can matter?  Well, Galileo said

"all things fall at the same rate" but of course he said something
much more detailed than that: he said

"all sufficiently dense things sufficiently close to the earth fall
with the same acceleration $g$"

of course Galileo didn't say that in fact Galileo didn't have any idea
that being close to the center of the earth matters.  but it does
matter.  it matters for a number of reasons.

say, when I looked up, say i looked up and the window washer was not
on the third story, but in fact was washing a window on the moon and
dropped the bucket.  how long would it take the bucket to hit me?

[]

it wouldn't!  it would hit the moon!  okay, yeah yeah

so say here's the earth, here's me, wa;king, and the window washer is
on an incredibly tall platform like this. and dropped the bucket.
would this be true?

[]

why not?

[]

It would?  Oh very good, we have a lawyer in the house.  it would be
true because the bucket isn't "sufficiently close" -- the rule
specifies sufficiently close so the rule is inapplicable.  its true
but inapplicable!

but why wouldn't it be the case that it falls with the same constant
acceleration g ?

right!  you already know that if I throw something near the surface of
the earth, it goes on a parabolic trajectory.  if it can be treated as
a point particle.

Say I throw some thing so hard it goes like this? is that still a
parabola?

it goes like that and lands over there.  in France.

is that a parabola, that trajectory?

its elliptical!@ orbits in gravity are ellipses, right?  so there is
some transition from parabola to ellipses.  all sorts of craziness is
happening.  so there is a THIRD approximation we are making that we
haven't even figured out until now, which is that we are close to the
earth.

we haven't even solved the damn problem!

everything falls at the same acceleration g.  we want to figure out
what time, how long it takes to fall, so what can be relevant?

is the mass of the bucket relevant?

its not relevant -- why not?

right.  we are assuming that galileo's law applies.  its sufficiently
dense, its sufficiently close to the earth, and so everything falls
with the same acceleration g.  that means my keys and this chalk fall
at the same acceleration

looked pretty good didn't it?

that means that the mass of the bucket doesn't matter.  does the area
of the bucket matter?

volume?

composition?

contents?

so none of that matters, and I want to compute the time it takes to
fall, so what matters?

height matters!  what matters?

height and I'm just gonna call it h for now.

the acceleration itself g.

this is all that matters.  that's pretty restrictive!

can anyone going to predict what I'm going to talk about next?

not the answer, that's for sure!

aah!  starting velocity does matter.  lets go back and look at that.

starting velocity it does matter absolutely.  I attempted to imply,
and I was not explicit, that its initial velocity was zero.  but very
good, it does matter, and we can see where it comes in as soon as we
are done.

we'll come back to that -- don't let me forget that although we may
run out of time.

those of you who came in late make sure that you get a copy of the web
page before you leave.

here we go.  anyone want to predict what I am going to talk about
next?

NO! not accuracy.  we will come back to that.

now we have identified these two quantities; what should we talk about
in these two quantities?

yes, sort of but they are sort-of unrelated.  but we just know that
this is much less than the radius of the earth.

that's a start.  this is what we need to solve the problem with.  lets
ask two really simple questions.  the first is, rough scaling, and by
this all i mean is, which of these quantities matters positively and
which matters negatively?

we are computing the time.  lets say the window washer was not at the
3rd story but the 30th story.  more time or less time?

more time!

lets say we are not on the planet earth, but we are on --- some other
planet where the gravity is stronger.  no lets go to the moon, the
moon has much less strong gravity at the surface than the earth.  if I
had happened to be walking along watching this in the moon, and the
window-washer had been on the third story of a building on the moon
(for your reference, stories are the same height on the moon as on the
earth).  would it take longer or shorter?

longer!

the rough scaling is time increases as h increases and g decreases.

okay, so that's a very useful thing.  its a very useful when you are
doing a problem like this to work that out.  hopefully in the future
it won't take you this long to do this proibelm, on the other hand it
is very useful to have these skills.  the important point of this
problem is not to get the solution of this problem; the point of this
problem is to talk about how to approach a physics problem, which will
in the future be far harder than this.  or perhaps not far harder than
this one, because when you approach a problem this way they are not
far harder than this because if you just work through what can matter,
which is more important than what , which physical effects matter, and
then you take the things you have decided could matter and you ask

what are the dimensions of those quantities?

Okay, lets do a little practice with dimensions.

if I measure the width of this door and I get L, the width of this
door, what are the dimensions of that quantity?  Do people know what I
mean by dimensions?

units!  the units in which I measure L would be, say, cm, or m.  The
dimensions are the generalization of cm or m, and the dimensions would
be length in this case.

if I measure in inches, it would be different units but the same
dimensions which would be length.

Lets say I give you an energy.

like you pick up a snickers bar oops that sounds like a product
placement you pick up a candy bar and it has a certain number of
calories.  that calories is a measure of energy, and energy has what
dimensions>

joules are units, it has units of joules or calories (actually
kilocalories, but thats another story).  But what are the dimensions
of energy?

Okay I will give you a hint.  Any formula you have ever heard for
energy has the right dimensions. so what is a formula you have heard
for energy?  the popular culture.  like when you oooh someone said
the formula someone said e = m c squared!  what is that formula>?  e
equals m c squared?  what's that?

a mass. what's that?

a speed, a length over a time.  so the dimensions of energy is mass
times length squared over time squared.  and thats the dimensions of
energy.  crazy?> no its not crazy.  ever formula for energy you have
ever heard has this property.  what's another formula you have heard
for energy?

one half m v squared.  a trivial one.  what's one half m v squared?
speed squared times mass ooh.  another one, give me another one?

m g h uh oh that looks more complicated.  it has three things in it
but what's g?  acceleration, which is meters per second squared.  so
this is mass times a length over a time squared times a length or mass
times length squared over time squared.

okay this is another one of those uge things like approximating and
comparisons, it is dimensions.

if you think of these objects, what is the dimensions of h?

length

what is the dimensions of g?

its meter per second squared, right.  I want you to always, whenever
you give me a number, you always have to have units on it.  don't ever
tell me that the acceleration is 9.8.  that doesn't mean anything
without units.  it is 9.8 meters per second squared.  because it is
also 32 because it is 32 feet per second squared.  so you could have
just said 32.  in fact, you could have just said "7" since you could
have made up your own unit system in which g happens to have the value
seven.  the answer is meaningless without units.

but you've given me units and not dimensions.  so what are the
dimensions of g?  they are length over time squared.

i said, ever formula you have ever seen for energy has the same
dimensions as energy, and you could generalize that.  any formula you
see for any quantity, say time, has to have the dimensions of that
quantity, which is, in this case...

what are we trying to determine here?

I have forgotten, because now we have been talking about this problem
for 51 minutes and we still haven't gotten close to solving it, in fact
we haven't written down any equation at all

its because I am trying to deemphasize equation.  i am trying to
emphasize that physics is not about equations on paper, physics is
about physical arguments, approximations, comparisons, dimensional
analysis, and thinking on your feet.

we are trying to find a time.

this is all that can matter -- h and g.  so I now want to give you
sixty seconds to discuss with your neighbor actually first of all I
want everyone to introduce themselves to their neighbors on both sides
-- go.

everyone comfortable?

with your neighbors, i want you to figure out and you have sixty
seconds, what combination of h and g or multiple combinations what
multiple combinations of h and g can you find and by combinations i
mean multiplications, divisions, exponentiations to the power of ten,
whatever combinations you can find, that have the dimensions of time.
Figure out how you are going to make these two symbols to combine to
make a time.  you have sixty seconds.

who here thinks they have a combination of h and g that has the
dimensions of time.  quite a few of you?

the square root of h divided by g?

how many people like that?

does anyone have any other suggestions for things with the dimensions
of time.  okay so lets just look at this combination.  and nobody has
any other combination than this?  good.

I actually don't know of any other combinations other than this.

who here wants to explain to me why this has dimensions of time, or
justify that this has dimensions of time?  no wrong question; who here
*can* justify that this has dimensions of time?

h is a length.

if I really wanted to labor he point, I could write this as length and
I could write this reciprocal as time squared over length, and
dimensionally this technique works -- I can just cancel the lengths,
and then I have a square root of a time squared which is a time.

now, little strange, have we written down any physics equations?  did
we ever wright down one half a t squared is this the right answer?

is it good enough?

lets work out what it is and then well work out the real answer

does this answer have to be exactly correct?  lets assume that the
approximations are correct -- imagine that they are perfectly correct
-- is this going to be the correct answer?

why not?

yes, but what kind of change could you make to this and have it be the
right answer.  Here I am going to show you a combination of h and g
that nobody thought of.

pi rood h / g!  or 1/37! root h / g boom!  we don't actually have the
right answer.  thats wrong by a factor of -- anybody know?

it is wrong by a factor of radical 2.  do we care?

right now we don't care because remember eventually we are going to
care.  we do need to sometimes get right answers.

but remember, when the bucket is falling, do you really care if it is
on second or 1.4 seconds. you probably just want to get out of the
way, so this answer, root h / g is not quite correct, but it contains
almost all of the physics of the problem.  everything after this is
just math,.  we just have to write down the correct equations and
solve the equations.  but we know that our answer has to be some
unknown constant times the suqre root of h / g it can involve pis and
radicals and factorials and whatever, but it is going to be a
dimensionless prefactor.

All of the dimensional part of the answer is right here, and besides
which, this answer is damn close to the right answer.  after all, we
could have manipulated symbols all over the place and gotten 100 micro
seconds, or we could have gotten 35 years.  but in fact when we made
the only combination of things that we could possibly have written
down that could possibly be close to correct, it is in fact close to
correct.

okay, what is this answer?  what is h for three stories?

not 30 m

its about 10 m its about 9 m lets call it 10 m for convenience.

what's g?

its about 10 m /s 2

square root of 10 m / 10 m / s2 I'm gonna skip a couple steps here

1 second!

correct answer is not one second, right its actually square root of
two longer, I think -- its gottaa be square root of two larger because
its a parabola that way.  but we have gotten almost all of the way to
the answer using nothing

there was nothing there, its just we talked about approximations, we
talked about galileo's principle, and then once we had Galileo s
principle we knew that only these two quantities could matter.  once
we knew that only these two quantities mattered, we get a formula
which is correct up to a dimensionless favctror we don't know and so
its actually not one second but actually one second times happy face
and we just have to determine what happy face is so all of that math
you did in high school, all of that crap, was just about determining
that that is a square root of two.  all of the physics of this problem
is in the dimensionless number

i am trying to separate out the physics from the math the math just
gets you the prefactor whih is not that interesting.  this tells you
that if its higher it takes longer to fall if gravity is higher it
takes less time to fall.

now say the window washer was on the sixth story and not the third
story, would it take twice as long, four times as long?

less than twice it would take the square root of two times as long

in fact there is a huge amount of information in this answer.

i don't have time to continue, because I have to say a few things
about what's in this handout...
