good morning class

[]

we talked about the falling bucket last time.  and were gonna complete
that at the end of class so at the end of this class we will finish
that problem and do it precisely.  and one of the issues that we will
have to face in this calss is when we are being precise and when we
are being accurate.

and as we talked about last time there are a lot of issues in that
problem about air resistance and thihns sloshing around and and all
sorts of things we arent doing exactly and therefore any solution we
have is inaccurate, but we can get a *precise* anser in the sens that
we can do a acllculation and get an answer.

but before lest to a completely different problme which is the
follwing what is the mass of the earth?

does anybody happen to know the earth of the mas -- dont say it --
does anyone happen to know it?  does anybody know the first hundred
digits of pi?

[]

20??  okay thats not bad. as you learn in thes class, i am very
supportyive aof and very encouragging to the geeks i did my
undergraduate degree at MIT where you learn about nerd pride and I
have a lot of nerd pride.  and if you spend your time with your
friends lazing on the beach memorizing digits of pi, i salute you.

nobody knows more tha n 20 digits of pi inthe room , and nobody knows
the mass of the earth in the room.  anybotdy know mroe than 20 digits
of pi?  you can admit it.

one of the gings we ar going to do in the problme set is work out some
digits of pi with a physical argument.  but that's for later.

but anywaht whba is the mass of the earth?  we are going tom ake ome
guesses.  i am going to put up sonme guesses and everyone has to vote

a. a million kg
b. a million million kg
c. a million million million kg
d. a (million)^4 kg

[laughter]

that is not even a joke.  that is how you would write it.  in fact
lets check exponential notation.  this is 10^6 kg this is 10^12, this
is 10^18, and this is 10^24.

i could go on.

now who of you has a ballpark idea of what the mass of the earth ought
to be in these units?  a few of you do.

lets take a vote. 

how many people think its a million kg?

nobody

a million million kg?

we have one...  anybody want to join?  two. okay. three!

a million million million kg?

ooh now we are getting real numbers.  that looks to me like 27.

[laughteer]

a million to the fourth kg?

we have eight

nobody voted for a milllion kg.  does someone ant to give me an
argument that it can't possibly be a million kg?

[you can fit a ton on a truck, right?]

you can fit a ton on a truck -- what is a ton?

[]

a ton is 2000 lb, or 1000 kg and then a metric tonne is exactly
1000Kg.  now those are numbers that are easy to remember because, well
to get a sense of what a tonne is, because what is something you might
actually own that weighs a ton?

[car]

a car weighs a tone and a tow truck can carry a ton.  and a u-haul
truck you can just rent is a 10-ton truck.  and then a semi or 18
wheeler holds i don't know 20-30 tons.  So a fleet of trucks can
actually MOVE a million KG no trouble.  in fact if you needed a
million kg of tomatos delivered to NY in three days, you could
actually get that.

You could just call someone...

its tomato season.

so a million kg is a kind of number you have seen before.  in fact if
you drove cross country you probably drove past 100 million kg of
cargo just driving on the road.

a million kg is nothing so clearly its not that its biggert than that.

but the reality is that you can estimate pretty accurately what the
mass of the earth is because you know lots about the earth!

so, for instance, and this is the point of this calass. -- we don't
actually care what the mass of the eart his but we might in some later
class whn we do orbits around th e earth -- but we waqnt to show that
you actuall know everything you need to compute the mass of the earth
and we can do it right now.

what od we need to compute hte mass of the earth?

[radius]

yeah -- radius.  what else?

[made of]

what its made of -- composition.

so lets start with composition because its the easy one.  so what's
the earth made of?  think about that for a second.  don't answe r
right away.  think about it for a bit before you give me the answer
that I usually get.  what's the answer I usually get that's completely
wrong?

[water?]

water!  thats the answer that is completely wrogn but you have
probably heard a statistica aobut water on the earth what statistic
have you heard?  75 percent of the earth's surface is water.  Is 75
percent of the earth water? no 75 percent of the survace of the earth
is water.  here;s a picture of the earth if this is a scale picture of
the earth, how deep are the oceans?  they are shallower than this
chalk line.  how deep is the ocean, anyway?  yeah, a couple of miles
it is on the order of miles and of course we will get a much bigger
number than that, but we will come back to that.

so the earth is not made of water, there is just a very thin surface
of water on the outside.  you are actually made of water, you are
water throught and through.  cut me in half and a whole bunch of water
comes out.  a bunch of other stuff, but it is mainly water

what is the earth actually made with?  iron!  what else is there?
aluminum -- there is definitely aluminum there.  silicon silicon's
very good.  so what are the most abundant elements in the universe?
hydrogen - hydrogen is by far the most abundant element in the
universe.  there are carbon nitrogen oxygen.  these are the most
abundante elements in the unverse.  where is most of the hydrogen in
the earth?  theres a lot of hydrogen on eatth, where is it?  there is
a lot in the air in what form is it gaseous hydrogen.  what is gaseous
hydrogen, assume I have some H2 here.  what happens to it?  It rises!
not only odes it rise to the top of the atmosphere.  by the way, how
thick is the atmosphere on this diagram?

One of the huge cultural experienees of humanity, an experience that
you never had, and I never had, was when the astronauts first made it
to the moon one of the first things they did was just turn the camera
around and take a photo of the earth.  and when they took a photo of
the earth, you don't see this big ball with all these trees on it and
people running around and monkeys in the jungle and big puffy
atmosphere with clouds in it and stuff like that when you look back at
the earth you don't see that, do you?  you see ap erfectly smooth ball
with the atmosphere like painted onto it, it looks like the atmosphere
is painted on because it is very very thin.  it is a very thin layer
on the surface of the earth.  It was a big moment in the 70s because
people realized that hey yeah, we can destroy the planet because this
layer this bio layer in which everything lives is incredibly thin --
this is worth remembering.  we are used to looking at this picture of
the earth, but remember that noone ever saw this picture bevfore and
they were shocked and that shock has disappeared because we got used
to this picture and we don't think of it as surprising but it is worth
keeping in mind how small this biolayer is that we all live in.

what's the earth made of?  where is most of the hydrogen on eatrth.
if you released a buch of hydrogen gas here it will go to the top of
the atmosphere and actually evaporate back off into space, because the
outer part of the atmosphere is being bombareded by cosmic rays and
photons and it is being heated up etc.

where is most of the hydrogen in the earth now?  water!  it is in all
sorts of organic compounds too but the vast majority is in the form of
water.  What about the carbon and oxygen in the earth?  and nitrogen?
carbon, nitrogen and oxygen are all involved in all kinds of things in
the earth.  then as you go up the periodic table, there are lots of
other common elements.  these are the most common in the universe but
on earth there are many others.  What are some examples of the most
common elements?  Silicon, iron, aluminum?  Iron is in fact the most
common element; most of the earth is in fact made of iron.

the vast majority of the earth is actually iron.  outside the iron,
what's here?  what's the earth basically made of?  Its rock!  like MTV
(laughter--why?)  elements like aluminum and the other metals are
pretty rare.  aluminum, gold, things like that.  In fact, they exist
in this rock form.  When aluminum is -- by the way, aluminum --
talking about environmentalism -- well you find aluminum in rocks in
the form of aluminum oxide.  so how do they turn it into tinfoil?
They have to use an immense amount of electrical power to extract the
aluminum from aluminum oxide, because aluminum is highly reactive.  it
is an amazingly painful and environmentally expensive process
extracting aluminum, and if you want to have a small environmental
footprint, you should try to use as little aluminum as possible.

its not like there are rivers of aluminum in the earth they just mine.
aluminum is highly reactive adn only exists naturlaly in its rusted
form which gets mined and turned into tinfoil by some horrible
process.

so most of the elements that youhave heard of are in fact extracted
from ores, most of the metals you have heard of.  but rocks are
basically made up of many different combinations of elements, and in
fact different rocks have different compositions, which make rocks
very differennt and intereesting.  this is why while you were
memorizing digits of pi, some other nerds out there were collecting
rocks.

who clledcted rocks?

so the earth si something like 50505 rock and metal, and rock contains
all different elemnents lots of different elements silicon iron
aluminoum are all in there along with everything else you ahve ever
heard of -- europium and all sorts of craxy stuff is all inc there.
it is included in the rock or trapped in the rock or in chemical
compounds in the rock.

so what we want to know is the mass of the earth so what do we care
about in here?  do we care about all the chemical comompositions of
the interior of theearth?  what do we care about?

[]

metal? we care about the metal and the rock.  what do we care about
them?

do we care about the chemical composition or the hardness?

[]

mass?  we care about the mass...

[]

mass density! the mass per unit volume.  we've got some radius okay so

what is the density of rock?

say imagine that you didn't know all sorts of geophysics, we know lots
of geophysics now -- and it is very interesting if you are interested
in geophysics how we *know* that the earth is made of rock and metal,
and how we know that for the metal part some of it is solid and some
of it is liquid, and we even know that the solid part is spinning.
There is a huge amount known about the earth and its internal
structure.  that's a really interesting and difficult subject.

now imagine that you lived in a cave.  you wouldn't know about all
that geophysiucs, so your natural assumption would be that the earth
was entirely made of rock because you are in a cave and totally
surrounded by rock.  it turns out that assumption issn't that bad.
now lets make an estimate.

we are not trying to make a precise estimate -- in fact i have only
asked you to narrow it down to a factor of a MILLION.  I haven't even
asked you to get it to a factor of ten -- i have only asked for a
factor of a million.  that's not very precise. 

to put that in context, imagine that your bank, on your bank
statement, made a mistake by a factor of a million.

[]

that would change your circumstances!  either way.

[]

in fact there aren't even a million CENTS in my bank account.  funny
how the banks rarely make a mistake in THAT direction

so what's the question?

we want to know the density of rock?

what are things you *do* know the density of?

[]

a lot of you know the density of water.  what is the density of water?

[]

its 1!  someone said the density of water is 1!  that answer is
unacceptable for all the reasons we know.  one what?

[]

ooh.  some of you said its one kilogram per liter.  and some of you
said its 1 gram per centimeter cubed.  who's right?

[]

oh both are right!  good.  its also 10^3 kg per cubic meter.

right?   because, well, lets do that.

1 g per cubic centimeter -- lets try to convert it into these units.

I don't care about units very much because its all trivial, but these
are the SI units, whats known as systeme internationale units, which
are metric units but a specific choice of the metric untis.  lets
convert 1 g per cu cm into the SI units, just as an exercise.

you will consider this trivial, but this is how I convert nitys.  this
is a trivial example, but sometimes thigns will get confusing, and
this method is very robust in confusing situations.

what i need to do is to convert grams into kg and cm into m.

lets do grams to kg.  1000 g is a kg and a kg is 1000g.

so I write a factor here which is equal to unity but has the right
units up and down to cancel stuff out.  so g is on the top here so I
want 1000 g on the botom and 1kg on the top to make the g cancel out.
Units cancel out here just like dimensions or like numbers.

now i do the same thihng for centimeters.  i want to go from
centimeters to meters.  how many centimeters in a meter?

[]

100!  centimeters are on the top or bottom here?

[]

bottom!  So I want to put 100 cm on the top here and 1 m on the
bottom.  and many of my students end here.  have they done the right
thing?

[]

no!  why not?

[]

cause this is cm to the minus three!  there are three factors of cm
here, so I have to cube this.  And if I cube that, then these cm take
out all 3 of these cm, and I have m cubed and I have kg and I just
have to multiply it out.  what's 100 cubed?

[]

10^6 !  100 is 10^2.  everyone happy with that?  if you are at all
unhappy with this way of manipulating numbers, go back to the books.
we are going to get faster with this as we go and everyone has to be
able to follow calculations like this.

that's 10^2 cubed thats 10^6 whats 10^6 over 1000?

[]

its 10^3 and so its 10 3 and all thats left over are kg and m cubed on
the bottom. meters to the minus three and that's the SI way of writing
1 g cm^-3

I don't realy care about si units i was just using this as an example
of conversion.

but we might as well do this problem in si units because it doesnt
really matter; all unit systems are equivalent.  we could be doing
this problem in stones and furlongs.  what's this density in stones
per cubic furlong?

i don't know.  and I don't care; its not illuminating.

so now we have to figure out the radius of the earth

the radius of the earth is not so easy.  some of you already know it
and I knnow a couple of ways to compute it, so i know the radius of
the earth really well.  the thing thats easier to figure out than the
radius of the earth is the circumference of the earth.

now what i want you to do -- do you have a question or are you going
to suggest something?

[]

oh we haven't got to the density of rock -- thank yoyu for stopping me
there.  i completely forgot we have to do rock!  this was water!

thank you!

that could have been a huge disaster -- we would have been off by....

would we have bbeen off by a factor of a million if we had used the
water density for rock?  

[]



no!  recall that we only need to get the answer correct to a factor of
one million!  so in fact we would have been just fine using the
density of water in stead of the density of rock.  but lets try to
estimate the density of rock because then our answer will be more
accurate.

so what is the density of rock?

who has any expereinece they can bring to bear on what the density of
rock is?

[]

ooh rock sinks!  its more than 1.  thats a relevant fact!  so rock
sinks in water.  anybody seen a really radical demonstration in which
the rock floats?

pumice! yeah, so if you have ever been to a really volcanic place like
nz, there are actually beaches where the rocks float.  now those are
really unusual rocks because they are all pumped up with...

[]

air! they are an air rock matrix, so they float.

imagine if there is some pumice here inside the earth.  what would
happen to it?

[]

it would be crushed down to very high density.  in fact the density of
the earth increases as you go in as you go to highter and higher
pressures.  so it gets more and more dense so in fact the rock right
at the rock metal transition is much more dense than the rocks at the
surface.  so the rocks like pumice only exist at the surface and the
amazing thing is that the pressures and the temperatures are so high
inside the earth that the rock actually flows like a fluid.  but its
not molten rock -- for the fluid to turn around like this takes tens
or hundreds of millions of years.  The rock is flowing, convecting,
heat transport [etc irrelevant stuff about mantle convection].
incredibly slow flow.

anybody else see an extreme demo in which rock floats?

[]

you can skip a rock!  but that has nothing to do with bouyancy, it has
to do with hydrodynamic forces when the thing is planing on the water.
once the skipping rock slows down, and the hydrodynamics becomes less
important, it sinks like any other rock.

so no-one has seen a demo in which a rock is floating?

[]

oh, where there is like an electrostatic force that holds the rock up?
yeah, there are crazy things like that.  anything else?

[]

it does float in mercury!  has anyone seen that?  a floating rock in
mercury?  its a really neat demo.  Unfortunately, it is hard demo to
do because it is hard to get safety approval for it!

because its mercury is not that dangerous, but about one ina hundred
times you do that deom you actually tip over the mercury dish, and you
have to get the guys in the white suits in here to clean up.  so it is
only dangerous because of spills.

but anyway rocks do float in mercury.

Okay, so we are not going to get a precise answer this way, so what's
another experience?  Here is an experience you might have had.  Who
here has lifted a bucket of water?

[]

good, many of you!  Now imagine you had a bucket of rocks instead of a
bucket of water.  and you know what it is like to lift a bucket of
water, its not that bad, you can lift it but it kind of gets tireing
if you have to lift it and carry it 20 or 30 miles.  now a bucket of
rocks is harder to lift than a bucket of water, obviously because
rocks sink in water, but is it a lot harder? is it hundreds of time
harder?  like do you need a crane to lift a bucket of rocks?  no you
can still lift it, right?  so are rocks a million times -- well we
don't even care about a million, are they a thousand times -- not even
a thousand, not even a hundred times more dense than water.

Now does
anyone happen to know the density of something really dense, say
uranium?  say you had a bucket of uranium.  bucket of water, buchet of
uranium.

[6?]

no it is much more.  Uranium is about 20 or 21 times the density of
water.  so urantim is very very dense.  if you had a bucket of uranium
you would have a lot of trouble lifting it.  even a block or uranium
the size of a brick is really really hard to lift.  at one point we
had a block of lead in the class room.  Even a brick-sized block of
lead is really hard to lift, and lead is much less dense than uranium.

anybody want to make a guess for what the density of rock is?

[]

Maybe three times the density of water?  Anybody want to go up or down
with an argument?

[uh oh - with an argument?]

yeah, with an argument.

[]

fourteen!  three is a good number of because it is the square root of
an order of magnitude.  is everyone comfortable with orders of
magnitude?  a factor of ten would be an order of magnitude, and a
factor of a hundred would be two orders of magnitude.  And clearly a
factor of one hundred is ruled out.  But its somewhere around half to
one order of magnitude, but we only have to get an answer to within a
factor of a million!  so lets go with a factor of three unless anyone
objects?  Its your class!  Okay, we will go with three.

In fact, typical rocks are about three times water, but the only issue
is that when you go very deep in the earth it starts to get really
dense, so the tru average density of the earth is really greater than
that, we are going to find how much greater by the end of this

the last class you all introduced yourself to your neighbors.  lets do
that again, because you have got something to discuss.  take a few
minutes to introduce yourself to your neighbor, remind them of your
name, even if you think they should remember it.

[chaos]

okay here we go!

what I want you to discuss with your neighbor is how -- so we have a
density three times water.  now what we need to know is the radius of
the earth.  we also need to know the shape of the earth?

[]

Not exactly a sphere!  Yes, but to within a factor of a Million, what
shape is the earth?

[]

yeah, a sphere.  but to within a factor of a million its shape is a
cube!

[laughter]

i mean, to a factor of a million, we have a lot of space to work with.

but anyway, what I want you to discuss with your neighbor -- you are
going to have 90 seconds -- is to work out a way that you, with your
current knowledge, can estimate the circumference of the earth.

so we are going to infer the radius of the earth from the
circumference.

but before I do that, someone could know the radius of the earth if
they had happened to walk that way [points radially] through to the
other side.  anyone done that?

[]

no!  in fact I know that no-one has done that because even if you had
a diamond-walled tunnel, it would have been crushed by the pressure
force inside the earth.  So nobody has gone all the way through.

but some of you have done things on the outside so maybe you know
something about the curvature or circumference or something about the
earth. so discuss with your neighbor and i want proposals at the end
for how we are going to estimate the circumference of the earth

go.

[chaos]

[Dwh: I think the above needs some talk of "you all live on the earth,
so you must be very familiar with it..." etc.]

okay I want to interrupt for a second to make sure of one thing.  you
are not allowed to come up with some kind of experiment you might do
or we could do; you have to use knowledge you already have on hand to
figure out the circumference of the earth.  okay?  so no laser ranging
experiments.  okay back to work.  i'll give you 60 seconds.

[chaos]

okay time's up!

hello.  okay.  let's go.

who here has a suggestion for how we can estimate the circumference of
the earth that they want to describe to me?

[silence]

okay that they *can* describe to me?

[]

yes, flight to china.  24 hours.  That's pretty good...

[]

and about 500
miles per hour.

[]

so for about half the thing you got about 12,000, or a total of about
24,000 miles.  that is a pretty good suggestion for how to get the
circumference of the earth.

anyone want to give me another one?

[]

good.  here's another one: 3000 miles from New York to California.
Who has driven that?  I drove it the other way.  I got my PhD at
Caltech, I am all nerd all the way, and then drove to Princeton (not
New York City) it was 2700 miles and I think it is a little further if
you drive from San francisco to new york.

so we have 300 miles, what do you do with that?

[]

it's three time zones!  Now there is a clever idea.  How many time
zones are there if you go the entire way around the earth?

[]

24! That's good.  Well, 3000 miles is about 3 time zones, so how far
is 24 time zones?

[]

24,000 miles.  I like that very much.  Any other suggestions?  Yes

[]

Good -- just piece it together.  Just say, well after all it takes
just about the same amount of time to fly to London as it does to
California.  So you have 3000 plus 3000 equals about 1/4 of the
circumference, which gives you about 24 my god they are all giving
24.

Yeah, another one?

[]

Yes...

[]

You would get a large distance, but would it be larger by a factor of
a million?  No, but it might be significantly larger.

There is another issue with this method.  This method which I love,
but there is an issue with it.  You are not going -- yeah -- around
the equator of the earth, and the earth is narrower here than it is
here.

These methods are all really imprecise.  On the other hand, if we
wanted a really precise measure, what would we do?

[]

yeah, we would go out and measure the damned thing!  In fact there is
a really good book out there called Longitude, which is the first
attempts to map out the lines of longitude on the earth and how far
apart they are etc. and it took a long time, and was very hard before
there were accurate clocks.

now it is very easy to do...

Anybody want to give me any other suggestions for the circumference of
the earth?

I've got one!

Mine is that the original - does anyone know what the original
definition of the meter was?  

[]

Very close...

[]

Its a quarter.  Its from the north pole to the equator through Paris!

[]

The benefits of being a history major!

This was the original definition of the meter was that this be 10,000
km.  or 10 million meters.

this tells you that the circumference of the earth equals 40,000 km.
roughly.  because of course as was just pointed out, this
circumference is actually a different length than this circumference,
because the earth is not exactly a sphere, it is an oblate spheroid,
with a few perturbations on it.

so is this estimate consistent with this estimate?  well first of all,
it it consistent at the factor of a million level?

[]

ok duh

is it consistent at the factor of two level?

[]

they are different units right, how many km in a mile, miles in a km?

[]

1609 meters in a mile!  miles and km are pretty similar, but they
differ by a factor of 

[]

1.6 or .6, which is the reciprocal of 1.6.  and which direction?  if I
  turn this into miles, will it be a smaller number or a bigger?

[]

smaller!   smaller by a factor of 1.6, which gets you what?

[]

24,000!  Now that's pretty spooky, because I didn't organize that in
advance, but in fact everyone has a pretty good estimate of the
circumference of the Earth!

----
41mins 30sec into file
